Add info to slack migration docs (#6788)
mattermost/docs: source/onboard/migrate-from-slack.rst

Migrate from Slack
==================

.. include:: ../_static/badges/allplans-selfhosted.rst
  :start-after: :nosearch:

Migrating from Slack to Mattermost involves the following steps:

1. `Prepare your Mattermost server <#prepare-your-mattermost-server>`__
2. `Generate a Slack import <#generate-a-slack-import>`__
3. `Download file attachments and email addresses <#download-file-attachments-and-email-addresses>`__
4. `Convert the Slack import to Mattermost's format <#convert-slack-import-to-mattermost-s-bulk-export-format>`__
5. `Import data into Mattermost <#import-data-into-mattermost>`__

> .. note::

Reviewer: We both kind ran into this around the same time I think.  I posted in [Developers: Server](https://github.com/mattermost/docs/pull/6788#discussion_r1411241200) about what I was having to do with running the command to get it to work, and Agniva shared https://mattermost.atlassian.net/browse/MM-55987 with me.

Ultimately this goes away when there's only the `mmctl` option.

> Are customers that are using the mounted filestore normally using a relative path for the local filestore?

I think its a mix.  Not sure I've seen a pattern.  I think often relative to the directory the MM process is started from... often `./data` I believe.

  If you are migrating to a self-hosted deployment of Mattermost, we recommend configuring your Mattermost server to use an S3 filestore before migration, as opposed to using the local filesystem filestore. If you are testing this in a development environment, you can use the ``minio`` docker image to simulate using an S3 bucket.

1. Prepare your Mattermost server
---------------------------------

We recommend you create a separate team in Mattermost for each of your Slack workspaces.

You can import two workspaces into the same team, but you'll need to ensure there are no channel name collisions first. Make sure that all users in Mattermost have the same username as in Slack, otherwise the import will fail.

Also, system administrator roles will be overwritten if the usernames match and the user isn't an admin on the Slack workspace.

2. Generate a Slack import
--------------------------

Slack offers two ways to `export your data from their product <https://get.slack.help/hc/en-us/articles/201658943-Export-your-workspace-data>`_.

> 1. Regular export - Contains only public channel posts. This does not include private channels, DMs, or group conversations. This can be generated from **Slack > Administration > Workspace settings > Import/Export Data > Export > Start Export**.

Reviewer 2: Getting to the import/export button wasn't that easy. The correct path was:

```
Workspace menu > Tools & Settings > Workspace Settings > Import/Export data button > Export 
```

It wasn't trivial even coming back to that section, as I went to _Customize workspace_ rather than _Workspace settings_ after actually knowing where the button was.

Maybe we can put some screenshots here? I made some.

cc: @cwarnermm

Reviewer 3: Screenshots are always a good addition to docs. They help orient users in our product and validate that the user is in the correct place for the next step in a process. All for adding screenshots and I can help with this lift, once we've landed the PR.

Author: I'm trying to get some screenshots but unfortunately the Slack webapp keeps crashing

> Maybe we can put some screenshots here? I made some.

@fmartingr Do you mean that you have screenshots to share?

Reviewer 2: > I'm trying to get some screenshots but unfortunately the Slack webapp keeps crashing
> 
> > Maybe we can put some screenshots here? I made some.
> 
> @fmartingr Do you mean that you have screenshots to share?

Yes, I will share them with you in Community.

3. Download file attachments and email addresses
------------------------------------------------

When you download your Slack export zip file, some data will be missing from the zip file:
- User emails
- Uploaded attachment contents

We need to create a Slack app in order to gather these contents. Follow these steps to create a Slack app:

1. Go to https://api.slack.com/apps.
2. Select **Create New App**.
3. Select **From scratch**.
4. Name the app **Slack Advanced Exporter** and select the workspace. You'll have to do this for every workspace. Then select **Create App**.
5. Select **OAuth & Permissions** on the left-hand side of the screen. Then scroll down to **Scopes**.
6. Under **Bot Token Scopes** type in and select the following scopes:
  - ``users:read``
  - ``users:read.email``

7. Scroll up and select **Install to Workspace**.
8. Grant the app permissions when prompted.
9. Copy the **Bot User OAuth Token** and save it somewhere convenient.

> We'll now use **Bot User OAuth Token** with the ``slack-advanced-exporter`` tool to download emails and attachments. Download the latest release of ``slack-advanced-exporter`` for your OS and architecture `here <https://github.com/grundleborg/slack-advanced-exporter/releases/>`__ and extract the executable from the download.

Reviewer 2: Should we make a note that the `slack-advanced-exporter` is not a Mattermost _product_? (Because it isn't, right?)

Reviewer 3: Transparency here will clarify ownership and build trust. Yes from me!

Author: @fmartingr I would say that it is a Mattermost product, as it was written by a Mattermost employee at the time. What are your thoughts on getting this moved to the Mattermost GitHub org, as an alternative to noting that it is not a Mattermost product?

Reviewer 2: I'm ok with moving it to the org if we plan to actively support it, but I can't make that decision since I don't know which team would own it and if they have bandwidth for it.

  - The second command can take a long time if you have a large number of file uploads. If it's interrupted, delete the file generated (if any), and start again.

The file ``export-with-emails-and-attachments.zip`` now contains all the information necessary to be imported into Mattermost.

From the slack advanced exporter repo:
Due to archive/zip limitations, these actions cannot modify archive in place. It's preferable to fetch e-mails first to avoid copying large attachments around.

.. important::

  Avoid unzipping and rezipping the Slack export. Doing so can modify the directory structure of the archive which could cause issues with the import process.

4. Convert Slack import to Mattermost's bulk export format
----------------------------------------------------------

Now that you have a Slack export file with emails and attachments, let's convert this information into Mattermost's bulk import format using the import preparation tool ``mmetl``. Download the latest release of ``mmetl`` for your `OS and architecture <https://github.com/mattermost/mmetl/releases/>`__. Run ``mmetl help`` to learn more about using the tool.

> Next, run the following command to create a Mattermost bulk import file. Replace ``<TEAM NAME>`` with the name of your team in Mattermost:

Reviewer 2: I had to use a team name without spaces. Tried `slack import` at first but it didn't work:

```
Data: map[error:Error during job execution. — BulkImport: Error importing channel. Team with name "slack import" could not be found., resource: Team id: name=slack import import_file:8jee3tjr1jd3xqi3mpbooe976r_mattermost-bulk-import.zip line_number:3]
```

After I changed it to `slack-import` it worked perfectly.

.. code:: bash

    ./mmetl transform slack --team <TEAM NAME> --file export-with-emails-and-attachments.zip --output mattermost_import.jsonl

The tool outputs a `.jsonl <https://jsonlines.org/examples>`__ file containing all of your users, channels, and posts. It also creates a ``data`` folder that contains all of your attachments.

> .. important::

Reviewer 2: nit: Can we use other color than green in the important blocks? they don't seem to impact that much right now. Maybe in the new docs design?

Reviewer 3: @fmartingr - Loving your mindset here! Yes, in the new docs design, we have full control over not only the colour of callouts, but can customize the header text and icons beyond "Notes" or "Important".

I agree that "Note" blocks should be styled to appear different/distinct from "Important" and other callouts to draw attention appropriately.

  It doesn't matter what you name the ``.jsonl`` file. You can name it what you want with the `--output` flag as shown above. It just needs to be a ``.jsonl`` file.

> The file ``mattermost-bulk-import.zip`` is now ready to import into Mattermost.

Reviewer 2: We don't have a zip file at this point.

.. code:: bash

  mmctl import upload ./mattermost-bulk-import.zip

Run this command to list the available imports:

.. code:: bash

  mmctl import list available

Run this command to process the import. Replace ``<IMPORT FILE NAME>`` with the name you got from the ``mmctl import list available`` command:

.. code:: bash

  mmctl import process <IMPORT FILE NAME>

Finally, run this command to view the status of the import process job. If the job status shows as ``pending``, then wait before running the command again. The ``--json`` flag is required to view the possible error message. Replace ``<JOB ID>`` with the id you got from the ``mmctl import list process`` command:

.. code:: bash

  mmctl import job show <JOB ID> --json

Option 2: Use the ``mattermost`` command to run the export
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

First get the ``.jsonl`` file and ``data`` folder onto your server using something like ``scp``. Then you'll use the ``mattermost`` binary to process the bulk import data:

.. code:: bash

    mattermost import bulk ./mattermost_import.jsonl --import-path ./data --apply

Debug imports
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> If you choose the ``mmctl`` option above, you can use the ``mmctl import job show`` command to view any relevant errors that may have occurred. If you run into problems which the error message does not help to resolve, please try the first option of using the ``mattermost bulk import`` command. The ``mmctl`` import process does not give you any additional debugging information, even in the Mattermost server logs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you choose the ``mmctl`` option above, you can use the ``mmctl import job show`` command to view any relevant errors that may have occurred. If you run into problems which the error message does not help to resolve, please try the second option of using the ``mattermost bulk import`` command. The ``mmctl`` import process does not give you any additional debugging information, even in the Mattermost server logs.
```

Reviewer: I think the ordering changed, hence the suggested edit.

.. important::

>     Note that if your logged in Mattermost user is not present in your input (neither the email nor the username matches any users in the import file), your user will not be added to any new channels in the import process.

Reviewer: What situation are we getting at here?  Are we kinda saying "Hey, if you are part of the user group being imported from Slack your Mattermost profile must have a matching username and email to the corresponding `User` line of the `jsonl` file.  You can manually edit the file to ensure make it match your Mattermost user"

Additional tools
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* `mm-emoji <https://github.com/maxwellpower/mm-emoji>`__ - Designed to smoothly transition emojis from a Slack instance to Mattermost.
* `mm-importjs <https://github.com/mickmister/mmimportjs>`__ - Breaks up large import files into smaller ones, as well as automatically remove null characters in post content when importing data to Mattermost.
* `slack-migrate-pinned-posts <https://github.com/svelle/slack-migrate-pinned-posts>`__ - Migrates pinned posts from Slack to Mattermost.

Use the imported team
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> * During the import process, the emails and usernames from Slack are used to create new Mattermost accounts. If emails are not present in the Slack export archive, then placeholder values will be generated and the system admin will need to update these manually.

Reviewer: My first thought was to add something like:

We recommend administrators search the final import `jsonl` file for `user` lines for with `@example.com` in the email property to address and resolve the missing information prior to import.

* Slack users can activate their new Mattermost accounts by using Mattermost's **Password Reset** screen with their email addresses from Slack to set new passwords for their Mattermost accounts.

> * Once logged in, Mattermost users will have access to previous Slack messages in the public channels imported from Slack.

Reviewer: I think a link that directs admins to instructyions for migrating users authentication method would be helpful.  I'm not sure if all the instructions should go here, or simply link off to our tool.  I'm inclined to put a full example for migrating email/pw users to SAML.

---------------------------------

We recommend you create a separate team in Mattermost for each of your Slack workspaces.

You can import two workspaces into the same team, but you'll need to ensure there are no channel name collisions first. Make sure that all users in Mattermost have the same username as in Slack, otherwise the import will fail.

Also, system administrator roles will be overwritten if the usernames match and the user isn't an admin on the Slack workspace.

2. Generate a Slack import
--------------------------

Slack offers two ways to `export your data from their product <https://get.slack.help/hc/en-us/articles/201658943-Export-your-workspace-data>`_.

1. Regular export - Contains only public channel posts. This does not include private channels, DMs, or group conversations. This can be generated from **Slack > Administration > Workspace settings > Import/Export Data > Export > Start Export**.
2. Corporate export - Contains all posts. This includes public channels, private channels, DMs and group messages. You must `request this export type from Slack directly <https://slack.com/help/articles/1500001548241-Request-to-export-all-conversations>`__.

> You will receive a zip file containing the following contents.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You will receive a zip file containing the following contents:
```

- Channels (``channels.json``)
- Users (``users.json``)
- Direct messages (``dms.json``) (Corporate export)
- Private channels (``groups.json``) (Corporate export)
- Group direct messages (``mpims.json``) (Corporate export)
- App activity logs (``integration_logs.json``)
- Folders containing posts for every public channel
- Folders containing posts for every private channel (Corporate exports)

.. note::

  - Refer to the `Slack help article <https://slack.com/help/articles/220556107-How-to-read-Slack-data-exports>`__ for additioanl details on zip file contents.
  - As a proprietary SaaS service, Slack is able to change its export format quickly and without notice. If you encounter issues not mentioned in the following documentation, please let the Mattermost Product Team know by `filing an issue <https://handbook.mattermost.com/contributors/contributors/ways-to-contribute>`__.

3. Download file attachments and email addresses
------------------------------------------------

> When you download your Slack export zip file, few pieces of data will be missing from the zip file:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When you download your Slack export zip file, some data will be missing from the zip file:
```

> - Emails of users

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- User emails
```

.. note::

  - The first command collects all of the user emails and creates the file ``export-with-emails.zip``. The second command fetches attachments and creates the file ``export-with-emails-and-attachments.zip``, which we will use going forward.
  - The second command can take a long time if you have a large number of file uploads. If it's interrupted, delete the file generated (if any), and start again.

The file ``export-with-emails-and-attachments.zip`` now contains all the information necessary to be imported into Mattermost.

From the slack advanced exporter repo:
Due to archive/zip limitations, these actions cannot modify archive in place. It's preferable to fetch e-mails first to avoid copying large attachments around.

.. important::

  Avoid unzipping and rezipping the Slack export. Doing so can modify the directory structure of the archive which could cause issues with the import process.

4. Convert Slack import to Mattermost's bulk export format
----------------------------------------------------------

> Now that you have a Slack export file with emails and attachments, let's convert this information into Mattermost's bulk import format using the import preparation tool ``mmetl``. Download the latest release of ``mmetl`` for your OS and architecture `here <https://github.com/mattermost/mmetl/releases/>`__. Run ``mmetl help`` to learn more about using the tool.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now that you have a Slack export file with emails and attachments, let's convert this information into Mattermost's bulk import format using the import preparation tool ``mmetl``. Download the latest release of ``mmetl`` for your `OS and architecture <https://github.com/mattermost/mmetl/releases/>`__. Run ``mmetl help`` to learn more about using the tool.
```

Next, run the following command to create a Mattermost bulk import file. Replace ``<TEAM NAME>`` with the name of your team in Mattermost:

.. code:: bash

    ./mmetl transform slack --team <TEAM NAME> --file export-with-emails-and-attachments.zip --output mattermost_import.jsonl

> The tool outputs a [.jsonl](https://jsonlines.org/examples) file containing all of your users, channels, and posts. It also creates a ``data`` folder that contains all of your attachments.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The tool outputs a `.jsonl <https://jsonlines.org/examples>`__ file containing all of your users, channels, and posts. It also creates a ``data`` folder that contains all of your attachments.
```

.. important::

  It doesn't matter what you name the ``.jsonl`` file. You can name it what you want with the `--output` flag as shown above. It just needs to be a ``.jsonl`` file.

The file ``mattermost-bulk-import.zip`` is now ready to import into Mattermost.

5. Import data into Mattermost
------------------------------

We have two options to run the import process:

1. SSH into the Mattermost server's host, upload the export file to this server's file system somehow, and use the ``mattermost`` command to process the export file.
2. Uploading the export through Mattermost's API, via command line ``mmctl`` from the server or from another computer. This option is required for Mattermost Cloud deployments.

> Note that for the second option, the server will save the import in its file store before running the import (e.g. AWS S3 if you are using that are your file store), so there will be time spent uploading/downloading the file in this case. Since this is really just a one-time thing to import this file, we recommend the first option of running it on the server itself if you have a large export zip file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For the second option, the server will save the import in its file store before running the import (e.g. AWS S3 if you are using that are your file store), so there will be time spent uploading/downloading the file in this case. Since this is really just a one-time thing to import this file, we recommend the first option of running it on the server itself if you have a large export zip file.
```

> Note that the migration is idempotent, meaning that you can run multiple imports that contain the same posts, and there will not be duplicated created posts in Mattermost. Each post is imported with the correct user/author and ``created_at`` value from your Slack instance. Threads are kept in tact with the import.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The migration is idempotent, meaning that you can run multiple imports that contain the same posts, and there will not be duplicated created posts in Mattermost. Each post is imported with the correct user/author and ``created_at`` value from your Slack instance. Threads are kept in tact with the import.
```

> Note that the migration is idempotent, meaning that you can run multiple imports that contain the same posts, and there will not be duplicated created posts in Mattermost. Each post is imported with the correct user/author and `created_at` value from your Slack instance. Threads are kept in tact with the import.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that the migration is idempotent, meaning that you can run multiple imports that contain the same posts, and there will not be duplicated created posts in Mattermost. Each post is imported with the correct user/author and ``created_at`` value from your Slack instance. Threads are kept in tact with the import.
```

Option 1: Use the ``mattermost`` command to run the export
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

First get the ``.jsonl`` file and ``data`` folder onto your server using something like ``scp``. Then you'll use the ``mattermost`` binary to process the bulk import data:

.. code:: bash
    mattermost import bulk ./mattermost_import.jsonl --import-path ./data --apply

.. important::

>     If doing this locally in a development environment, you'll want to set the location of your server's data folder first like so:

Reviewer: I think the "local development environment" scenario might be better suited to an FAQ or "Troubleshooting" section at the bottom.  I would think most readers will be admins looking to do this with official Mattermost releases.

@mickmister thoughts?

Author: @sadohert Sounds good to me. Also, maybe all internal testing should be done using S3/Minio and not the local file system setup. If you agree I'll add a piece about recommending external storage over local. There really shouldn't be any production deployments using the local filesystem for data storage anyway. (I've heard the horror stories of data loss)

Reviewer 3: @mickmister - I'll hold off approving this PR so that you can apply this update.

>     export MM_FILESETTINGS_DIRECTORY=/absolute/path/to/mattermost/server/data

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    ``export MM_FILESETTINGS_DIRECTORY=/absolute/path/to/mattermost/server/data``
```

>     You can use an official Mattermost release to obtain a ``mattermost`` binary to use, or run `make build-(arch)` to build the binary and have it placed in the ``GOBIN`` directory.

Reviewer: I'm inclined to expect customers are working with an official release, and leave the `make` path to advanced users to figure out.

Author: @sadohert Yes this is related to doing internal testing. I'll just assume we're using the production release for internal testing as well, and recommend that as such in the docs

Reviewer 3: Thanks, @mickmister!

Option 2: Upload export via ``mmctl``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Ensure you have the Mattermost command line tool ``mmctl`` installed. This allows you to perform different tasks that communicate to Mattermost's API. You'll also want to [configure authentication](https://docs.mattermost.com/manage/mmctl-command-line-tool.html#mmctl-auth) for the tool.

Reviewer: Can we link to the `mmctl` doc here?

> Ensure you have the Mattermost command line tool ``mmctl`` installed. This allows you to perform different tasks that communicate to Mattermost's API. You'll also want to [configure authentication](https://docs.mattermost.com/manage/mmctl-command-line-tool.html#mmctl-auth) for the tool.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Ensure you have the Mattermost command line tool ``mmctl`` installed. This allows you to perform different tasks that communicate to Mattermost's API. You'll also want to `configure authentication </manage/mmctl-command-line-tool.html#mmctl-auth>`__ for the tool.
```
